I was in New York during hurricane sandy
and this little white dog called Maui
was staying with me half the city was
dark because of a power cut and I was
living on the dark side
now Maui was terrified of the dark so I
had to carry him up the stairs actually
down the stairs first for his walk and
then bring him back up
I was also hauling gallons of bottles of
water up to the 7th floor every day and
through all of this I had to hold a
torch between my teeth
the stores nearby were out of
flashlights and batteries and bread for
a shower
I walked 40 blocks to a branch of my gym
but these were not the major
preoccupations of my day it was just as
critical for me to be the first person
in at a cafe nearby with extension cords
and chargers to juice my multiple
devices I started to prospect under the
benches of bakeries and the entrances of
pastry shops for plug points I wasn't
the only one even in the rain people
stood between Madison and 5th Avenue
under their umbrellas charging their
cell phones from outlets on the street
Nature had just reminded us that it was
stronger than all our technology and yet
here we were obsessed about being wired
I think there's nothing like a crisis to
tell you what's really important and
what's not and sandy made me realize
there are devices and their connectivity
matter to us right up there with food
and shelter the self as we once knew it
no longer exists and I think that an
abstract digital universe has become a
part of our identity and I want to talk
to you about what I think that means I'm
a novelist and I'm interested in the
self because the self and fiction have a
lot in common
they're both stories interpretations you
and I can experience things without a
story we might run up the stairs too
quickly and we might get breathless but
the larger sense that we have of our
lives the sly
more abstract one is indirect our story
of our life is based on direct
experience but it's embellished a novel
needs scene after scene to build and the
story of our life needs an arc as well
it needs months and years discrete
moments from our lives ayats chapters
but the story is not about these
chapters it's the whole book it's not
only about the heartbreak and the
happiness the victories and the
disappointments but it's because how
because of these and sometimes more
importantly in spite of these we find
our place in the world and we change it
and we change ourselves our story
therefore needs two dimensions of time a
long arc of time that is our lifespan
and the timeframe of direct experience
that is the moment now the self that
experiences directly can only exist in
the moment but the one that narrates
needs several moments a whole sequence
of them and that's why our full sense of
self needs both immersive experience and
the flow of time now the flow of time is
embedded in everything in the erosion of
a grain of sand in the budding of a
little bud into a rose without it we
would have no music our own emotions and
state of mind often encode time regret
or nostalgia about the past hope or
dread about the future I think that
technology has altered that flow of time
the overall time that we have for our
narrative our lifespan has been
increasing but the smallest measure the
moment has shrunk it has shrunk because
our instruments enable us in part to
measure smaller and smaller units of
time and this in turn has given us a
more granular understanding of the
material world and this granular
understanding has generated reams of
data that our brains can no longer
comprehend and for which we need more
and more complicated computers all of
this to say that the gap between what we
can perceive and what we can measure is
only going to widen science can do
things within in a picosecond
but you and I are never going to have
the inner
perience of a millionth of a millionth
of a second you and I answer only to
nature's rhythm and flow to the Sun the
moon and the seasons and this is why we
need that long arc of time with the past
the present and the future to see things
for what they are two separate signal
from noise and the self from sensations
we need x arrow to understand cause and
effect not just in the material world
but in our own intentions and our
motivations what happens when that arrow
goes awry what happens when time warps
so many of us today have the sensation
that x arrow is pointing everywhere and
nowhere at once this is because time
doesn't flow in the digital world in the
same way that it does in the natural one
we all know that the Internet has shrunk
space as well as time far away over
there is now here news from India is a
stream on my smartphone app whether I'm
in New York or New Delhi and that's not
all
your last job your dinner reservations
from last year your former friends lie
on a flat plane with today's friends
because the internet also archives and
it warps the past with no distinction
left between the past the present and
the future and the here or there we are
left with this moment everywhere this
moment that I'll call the digital now
just how can we prioritize in the
landscape of the digital now this
digital now is not the present because
it's always a few seconds ahead with
Twitter streams that are already
trending and used from other time zones
this isn't the now of a shooting pain in
your foot or the second that you bite
into a pastry or the three hours that
you lose yourself in a great book this
now bears very little physical or
psychological reference to our own state
its focus instead is to distract us at
every turn on the road every digital
landmark is an invitation to leave what
you're doing now to go somewhere else
and do something else are you reading an
interview by an author why not buy his
book tweet it share it like it find
other books exactly like his find other
people reading those books Travel can be
berating but when it is incessant we
become permanent exiles without repose
choice is freedom but not when it's
constantly for its own sake not just is
the digital now far from the present but
it's in direct competition with it and
this is because not just am i absent
from it but so are you not just a wee
absent from it but so is everyone else
and therein lies its greatest
convenience and horror I can order
foreign language books in the middle of
the night shop for Parisian macarons and
leave video messages that get picked up
later at all times I can operate at a
different rhythm and pace from you while
I sustain the illusion that I'm tapped
into you in real time sandy was a
reminder of how such an illusion can
shatter they were those with power and
water and those without
they are those who went back to their
lives and those who are still displaced
after so many months for some reason
technology seems to perpetuate the
illusion for those who have it that
everyone does and then like an ironic
slap in the face it makes it true for
example it said that there are more
people in India with access to cell
phones than toilets now if this rift
which is already so great in many parts
of the world between the lack of
infrastructure and the spread of
technology isn't somehow bridged there
will be ruptures between the digital and
the real for us as individuals who live
in the digital now and spend most of our
waking moments in it the challenge is to
live in two streams of time that are
parallel and almost simultaneous how
does one live inside distraction we
might think that those younger than us
who are born into this will adapt more
naturally possibly but I remember my
childhood I remember my grandfather
revising the capitals of the world with
me Buda and pest were separated by the
Danube and Vienna had a Spanish Riding
School if I were a child today I could
easily learn this information with apps
and hyperlinks but it really wouldn't be
the same because much later I went to
Vienna and I went to the Spanish Riding
School and I could feel my grandfather
right beside me
night after night e2
me up on the terrace on his shoulders
and pointed out Jupiter and Saturn and
the Great Bear to me and even here when
I look at the Great Bear I get back that
feeling of being a child hanging on to
his head and trying to balance myself on
his shoulder and I can get back that
feeling of being a child again what I
had with my grandfather was wrapped so
often in information and knowledge and
fact but it was about so much more than
information or knowledge or fact time
warping technology challenges our
deepest core because we are able to
archive the past and some of it becomes
hard to forget even as the as the
current moment is increasingly
unmemorable we want a clutch and we're
left instead clutching at a series of
static moments they're like soap bubbles
that disappear when we touch them by
archiving everything we think that we
can store it but time is not data it
cannot be stored you and I know exactly
what it means like to be truly present
in a moment it might have happened while
we are playing an instrument or looking
into the eyes of someone we've known for
a very long time at such moments our
selves are complete the self that lives
in the long narrative arc and the self
that experiences the moment become one
the present encapsulate the past and a
promise for the future the present joins
a flow of time from before and after I
first experienced these feelings with my
grandmother I wanted to learn to skip
and she found an old rope and she tucked
up her sari and she jumped over it I
wanted to learn to cook and she kept me
in the kitchen cutting cubing and
chopping for a whole month my
grandmother taught me that things happen
in the time they take that time can't be
fought and because it will pass and it
will move we owe the present moment our
full attention attention is time one of
my yoga instructors once said that love
is attention and definitely for my
grandmother love and attention were one
and the same thing the digital world
cannibalizes time
and in doing so I want to suggest that
what it threatens is the completeness of
ourselves it threatens the flow of love
but we don't need to let it we can
choose otherwise we've seen again and
again just how creative technology can
be and in our lives and in our actions
we can choose those solutions and those
innovations and those moments that
restore the flow of time instead of
fragmenting it we can slow down and we
can tune in to the ebb and flow of time
we can choose to take time back thank
you
[Applause]